Layer Normalization
Jimmy Lei Ba
University of Toronto
jimmy@psi.toronto.edu
Jamie Ryan Kiros
University of Toronto
rkiros@cs.toronto.edu
Geoffrey E. Hinton
University of Toronto
and Google Inc.
hinton@cs.toronto.edu
Abstract
Training state-of-the-art, deep neural networks is computationally expensive. One
way to reduce the training time is to normalize the activities of the neurons. A
recently introduced technique called batch normalization uses the distribution of
the summed input to a neuron over a mini-batch of training cases to compute a
mean and variance which are then used to normalize the summed input to that
neuron on each training case. This signiﬁcantly reduces the training time in feed-
forward neural networks. However, the effect of batch normalization is dependent
on the mini-batch size and it is not obvious how to apply it to recurrent neural net-
works. In this paper, we transpose batch normalization into layer normalization by
computing the mean and variance used for normalization from all of the summed
inputs to the neurons in a layer on asingle training case. Like batch normalization,
we also give each neuron its own adaptive bias and gain which are applied after
the normalization but before the non-linearity. Unlike batch normalization, layer
normalization performs exactly the same computation at training and test times.
It is also straightforward to apply to recurrent neural networks by computing the
normalization statistics separately at each time step. Layer normalization is very
effective at stabilizing the hidden state dynamics in recurrent networks. Empiri-
cally, we show that layer normalization can substantially reduce the training time
compared with previously published techniques.
1 Introduction
Deep neural networks trained with some version of Stochastic Gradient Descent have been shown
to substantially outperform previous approaches on various supervised learning tasks in computer
vision [Krizhevsky et al., 2012] and speech processing [Hinton et al., 2012]. But state-of-the-art
deep neural networks often require many days of training. It is possible to speed-up the learning
by computing gradients for different subsets of the training cases on different machines or splitting
the neural network itself over many machines [Dean et al., 2012], but this can require a lot of com-
munication and complex software. It also tends to lead to rapidly diminishing returns as the degree
of parallelization increases. An orthogonal approach is to modify the computations performed in
the forward pass of the neural net to make learning easier. Recently, batch normalization [Ioffe and
Szegedy, 2015] has been proposed to reduce training time by including additional normalization
stages in deep neural networks. The normalization standardizes each summed input using its mean
and its standard deviation across the training data. Feedforward neural networks trained using batch
normalization converge faster even with simple SGD. In addition to training time improvement, the
stochasticity from the batch statistics serves as a regularizer during training.
Despite its simplicity, batch normalization requires running averages of the summed input statis-
tics. In feed-forward networks with ﬁxed depth, it is straightforward to store the statistics separately
for each hidden layer. However, the summed inputs to the recurrent neurons in a recurrent neu-
ral network (RNN) often vary with the length of the sequence so applying batch normalization to
RNNs appears to require different statistics for different time-steps. Furthermore, batch normaliza-
arXiv:1607.06450v1  [stat.ML]  21 Jul 2016
tion cannot be applied to online learning tasks or to extremely large distributed models where the
minibatches have to be small.
This paper introduces layer normalization, a simple normalization method to improve the training
speed for various neural network models. Unlike batch normalization, the proposed method directly
estimates the normalization statistics from the summed inputs to the neurons within a hidden layer
so the normalization does not introduce any new dependencies between training cases. We show that
layer normalization works well for RNNs and improves both the training time and the generalization
performance of several existing RNN models.
2 Background
A feed-forward neural network is a non-linear mapping from a input pattern x to an output vector
y. Consider the lth hidden layer in a deep feed-forward, neural network, and let al be the vector
representation of the summed inputs to the neurons in that layer. The summed inputs are computed
through a linear projection with the weight matrixWl and the bottom-up inputshl given as follows:
al
i =wl
i
⊤
hl hl+1
i =f(al
i +bl
i) (1)
wheref(·) is an element-wise non-linear function andwl
i is the incoming weights to theith hidden
units and bl
i is the scalar bias parameter. The parameters in the neural network are learnt using
gradient-based optimization algorithms with the gradients being computed by back-propagation.
One of the challenges of deep learning is that the gradients with respect to the weights in one layer
are highly dependent on the outputs of the neurons in the previous layer especially if these outputs
change in a highly correlated way. Batch normalization [Ioffe and Szegedy, 2015] was proposed
to reduce such undesirable “covariate shift”. The method normalizes the summed inputs to each
hidden unit over the training cases. Speciﬁcally, for theith summed input in thelth layer, the batch
normalization method rescales the summed inputs according to their variances under the distribution
of the data
¯al
i = gl
i
σl
i
(
al
i−µl
i
)
µl
i = E
x∼P (x)
[
al
i
]
σl
i =
√
E
x∼P (x)
[(
al
i−µl
i
)2]
(2)
where ¯al
i is normalized summed inputs to theith hidden unit in thelth layer andgi is a gain parame-
ter scaling the normalized activation before the non-linear activation function. Note the expectation
is under the whole training data distribution. It is typically impractical to compute the expectations
in Eq. (2) exactly, since it would require forward passes through the whole training dataset with the
current set of weights. Instead, µ andσ are estimated using the empirical samples from the current
mini-batch. This puts constraints on the size of a mini-batch and it is hard to apply to recurrent
neural networks.
3 Layer normalization
We now consider the layer normalization method which is designed to overcome the drawbacks of
batch normalization.
Notice that changes in the output of one layer will tend to cause highly correlated changes in the
summed inputs to the next layer, especially with ReLU units whose outputs can change by a lot.
This suggests the “covariate shift” problem can be reduced by ﬁxing the mean and the variance of
the summed inputs within each layer. We, thus, compute the layer normalization statistics over all
the hidden units in the same layer as follows:
µl = 1
H
H∑
i=1
al
i σl =
vuu√ 1
H
H∑
i=1
(
al
i−µl)2
(3)
whereH denotes the number of hidden units in a layer. The difference between Eq. (2) and Eq. (3)
is that under layer normalization, all the hidden units in a layer share the same normalization terms
µ andσ, but different training cases have different normalization terms. Unlike batch normalization,
layer normaliztion does not impose any constraint on the size of a mini-batch and it can be used in
the pure online regime with batch size 1.
2