Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , pages 8342–8360
July 5 - 10, 2020. c©2020 Association for Computational Linguistics
8342
Don’t Stop Pretraining: Adapt Language Models to Domains and Tasks
Suchin Gururangan† Ana Marasovi´c†♦ Swabha Swayamdipta†
Kyle Lo† Iz Beltagy† Doug Downey† Noah A. Smith†♦
†Allen Institute for Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Seattle, W A, USA
♦Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle, W A, USA
{suching,anam,swabhas,kylel,beltagy,dougd,noah}@allenai.org
Abstract
Language models pretrained on text from a
wide variety of sources form the foundation
of today’s NLP. In light of the success of
these broad-coverage models, we investigate
whether it is still helpful to tailor a pretrained
model to the domain of a target task. We
present a study across four domains (biomedi-
cal and computer science publications, news,
and reviews) and eight classiﬁcation tasks,
showing that a second phase of pretraining in-
domain ( domain-adaptive pretraining ) leads
to performance gains, under both high- and
low-resource settings. Moreover, adapting
to the task’s unlabeled data ( task-adaptive
pretraining) improves performance even after
domain-adaptive pretraining. Finally, we show
that adapting to a task corpus augmented us-
ing simple data selection strategies is an effec-
tive alternative, especially when resources for
domain-adaptive pretraining might be unavail-
able. Overall, we consistently ﬁnd that multi-
phase adaptive pretraining offers large gains in
task performance.
1 Introduction
Today’s pretrained language models are trained on
massive, heterogeneous corpora (Raffel et al., 2019;
Yang et al., 2019). For instance, ROBERTA (Liu
et al., 2019) was trained on over 160GB of uncom-
pressed text, with sources ranging from English-
language encyclopedic and news articles, to literary
works and web content. Representations learned
by such models achieve strong performance across
many tasks with datasets of varying sizes drawn
from a variety of sources (e.g., Wang et al., 2018,
2019). This leads us to ask whether a task’s textual
domain—a term typically used to denote a distribu-
tion over language characterizing a given topic or
genre (such as “science” or “mystery novels”)—is
still relevant. Do the latest large pretrained mod-
els work universally or is it still helpful to build
Figure 1: An illustration of data distributions. Task
data is comprised of an observable task distribution,
usually non-randomly sampled from a wider distribu-
tion (light grey ellipsis) within an even larger target do-
main, which is not necessarily one of the domains in-
cluded in the original LM pretraining domain – though
overlap is possible. We explore the beneﬁts of contin-
ued pretraining on data from the task distribution and
the domain distribution.
separate pretrained models for speciﬁc domains?
While some studies have shown the beneﬁt of
continued pretraining on domain-speciﬁc unlabeled
data (e.g., Lee et al., 2019), these studies only con-
sider a single domain at a time and use a language
model that is pretrained on a smaller and less di-
verse corpus than the most recent language mod-
els. Moreover, it is not known how the beneﬁt of
continued pretraining may vary with factors like
the amount of available labeled task data, or the
proximity of the target domain to the original pre-
training corpus (see Figure 1).
We address this question for one such high-
performing model, ROBERTA (Liu et al., 2019)
(§2). We consider four domains (biomedical and
computer science publications, news, and reviews;
§3) and eight classiﬁcation tasks (two in each do-
main). For targets that are not already in-domain
for ROBERTA, our experiments show that contin-
8343
ued pretraining on the domain (which we refer to as
domain-adaptive pretrainingor DAPT ) consistently
improves performance on tasks from the target do-
main, in both high- and low-resource settings.
Above, we consider domains deﬁned around gen-
res and forums, but it is also possible to induce a
domain from a given corpus used for a task, such
as the one used in supervised training of a model.
This raises the question of whether pretraining on
a corpus more directly tied to the task can fur-
ther improve performance. We study how domain-
adaptive pretraining compares to task-adaptive pre-
training, or TAPT, on a smaller but directly task-
relevant corpus: the unlabeled task dataset ( §4),
drawn from the task distribution. Task-adaptive
pretraining has been shown effective (Howard and
Ruder, 2018), but is not typically used with the
most recent models. We ﬁnd that TAPT provides
a large performance boost for ROBERTA, with or
without domain-adaptive pretraining.
Finally, we show that the beneﬁts from task-
adaptive pretraining increase when we have addi-
tional unlabeled data from the task distribution that
has been manually curated by task designers or an-
notators. Inspired by this success, we propose ways
to automatically select additional task-relevant un-
labeled text, and show how this improves perfor-
mance in certain low-resource cases (§5). On all
tasks, our results using adaptive pretraining tech-
niques are competitive with the state of the art.
In summary, our contributions include:
• a thorough analysis of domain- and task-
adaptive pretraining across four domains and
eight tasks, spanning low- and high-resource
settings;
• an investigation into the transferability of
adapted LMs across domains and tasks; and
• a study highlighting the importance of pre-
training on human-curated datasets, and a sim-
ple data selection strategy to automatically
approach this performance.
Our code as well as pretrained models for multiple
domains and tasks are publicly available.1
2 Background: Pretraining
Learning for most NLP research systems since
2018 consists of training in two stages. First, a
neural language model (LM), often with millions
of parameters, is trained on large unlabeled cor-
1https://github.com/allenai/
dont-stop-pretraining
pora. The word (or wordpiece; Wu et al. 2016)
representations learned in the pretrained model are
then reused in supervised training for a downstream
task, with optional updates (ﬁne-tuning) of the rep-
resentations and network from the ﬁrst stage.
One such pretrained LM is ROBERTA (Liu
et al., 2019), which uses the same transformer-
based architecture (Vaswani et al., 2017) as its
predecessor, BERT (Devlin et al., 2019). It is
trained with a masked language modeling objec-
tive (i.e., cross-entropy loss on predicting randomly
masked tokens). The unlabeled pretraining corpus
for ROBERTA contains over 160 GB of uncom-
pressed raw text from different English-language
corpora (see Appendix§A.1). ROBERTA attains
better performance on an assortment of tasks than
its predecessors, making it our baseline of choice.
Although ROBERTA’s pretraining corpus is de-
rived from multiple sources, it has not yet been
established if these sources are diverse enough to
generalize to most of the variation in the English
language. In other words, we would like to un-
derstand what is out of ROBERTA’s domain. To-
wards this end, we explore further adaptation by
continued pretraining of this large LM into two
categories of unlabeled data: (i) large corpora of
domain-speciﬁc text (§3), and (ii) available unla-
beled data associated with a given task (§4).
3 Domain-Adaptive Pretraining
Our approach to domain-adaptive pretraining
(DAPT ) is straightforward—we continue pretrain-
ing ROBERTA on a large corpus of unlabeled
domain-speciﬁc text. The four domains we focus
on are biomedical (BIOMED) papers, computer sci-
ence (CS) papers, newstext from REAL NEWS, and
AMAZON reviews. We choose these domains be-
cause they have been popular in previous work, and
datasets for text classiﬁcation are available in each.
Table 1 lists the speciﬁcs of the unlabeled datasets
in all four domains, as well asROBERTA’s training
corpus.1
3.1 Analyzing Domain Similarity
Before performing DAPT , we attempt to quantify
the similarity of the target domain to ROBERTA’s
pretraining domain. We consider domain vocab-
ularies containing the top 10K most frequent uni-
grams (excluding stopwords) in comparably sized
1For BIOMED and CS, we used an internal version of
S2ORC that contains papers that cannot be released due to
copyright restrictions.