GAUSSIAN ERROR LINEAR UNITS (GELU S)
Dan Hendrycks∗
University of California, Berkeley
hendrycks@berkeley.edu
Kevin Gimpel
Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago
kgimpel@ttic.edu
ABSTRACT
We propose the Gaussian Error Linear Unit (GELU), a high-performing neural
network activation function. The GELU activation function isxΦ(x), where Φ(x)
the standard Gaussian cumulative distribution function. The GELU nonlinearity
weights inputs by their value, rather than gates inputs by their sign as in ReLUs
(x1x>0). We perform an empirical evaluation of the GELU nonlinearity against
the ReLU and ELU activations and find performance improvements across all
considered computer vision, natural language processing, and speech tasks.
1 I NTRODUCTION
Early artificial neurons utilized binary threshold units (Hopfield, 1982; McCulloch & Pitts, 1943).
These hard binary decisions are smoothed with sigmoid activations, enabling a neuron to have a “fir-
ing rate” interpretation and to train with backpropagation. But as networks became deeper, training
with sigmoid activations proved less effective than the non-smooth, less-probabilistic ReLU (Nair &
Hinton, 2010) which makes hard gating decisions based upon an input’s sign. Despite having less of
a statistical motivation, the ReLU remains a competitive engineering solution which often enables
faster and better convergence than sigmoids. Building on the successes of ReLUs, a recent modifi-
cation called ELUs (Clevert et al., 2016) allows a ReLU-like nonlinearity to output negative values
which sometimes increases training speed. In all, the activation choice has remained a necessary
architecture decision for neural networks lest the network be a deep linear classifier.
Deep nonlinear classifiers can fit their data so well that network designers are often faced with the
choice of including stochastic regularizer like adding noise to hidden layers or applying dropout (Sri-
vastava et al., 2014), and this choice remains separate from the activation function. Some stochastic
regularizers can make the network behave like an ensemble of networks, a pseudoensemble (Bach-
man et al., 2014), and can lead to marked accuracy increases. For example, the stochastic regular-
izer dropout creates a pseudoensemble by randomly altering some activation decisions through zero
multiplication. Nonlinearities and dropout thus determine a neuron’s output together, yet the two
innovations have remained distinct. More, neither subsumed the other because popular stochastic
regularizers act irrespectively of the input and nonlinearities are aided by such regularizers.
In this work, we introduce a new nonlinearity, the Gaussian Error Linear Unit (GELU). It relates
to stochastic regularizers in that it is the expectation of a modification to Adaptive Dropout (Ba &
Frey, 2013). This suggests a more probabilistic view of a neuron’s output. We find that this novel
nonlinearity matches or exceeds models with ReLUs or ELUs across tasks from computer vision,
natural language processing, and automatic speech recognition.
2 GELU F ORMULATION
We motivate our activation function by combining properties from dropout, zoneout, and ReLUs.
First note that a ReLU and dropout both yield a neuron’s output with the ReLU deterministi-
cally multiplying the input by zero or one and dropout stochastically multiplying by zero. Also,
a new RNN regularizer called zoneout stochastically multiplies inputs by one (Krueger et al.,
2016). We merge this functionality by multiplying the input by zero or one, but the values of
this zero-one mask are stochastically determined while also dependent upon the input. Specif-
ically, we can multiply the neuron input x by m ∼ Bernoulli(Φ(x)), where Φ(x) = P (X ≤
∗Work done while the author was at TTIC. Code available at github.com/hendrycks/GELUs
1
arXiv:1606.08415v5  [cs.LG]  6 Jun 2023
x),X ∼ N(0, 1) is the cumulative distribution function of the standard normal distribution.
We choose this distribution since neuron inputs tend to follow a normal distribution, especially
with Batch Normalization. In this setting, inputs have a higher probability of being “dropped”
as x decreases, so the transformation applied to x is stochastic yet depends upon the input.
4
 3
 2
 1
 0 1 2 3
1
0
1
2
3 GELU
ReLU
ELU
Figure 1: The GELU ( µ = 0,σ = 1 ), ReLU, and ELU
(α = 1).
Masking inputs in this fashion re-
tains non-determinism but maintains
dependency upon the input value. A
stochastically chosen mask amounts to
a stochastic zero or identity transforma-
tion of the input. This is much like
Adaptive Dropout (Ba & Frey, 2013),
but adaptive dropout is used in tandem
with nonlinearities and uses a logistic
not standard normal distribution. We
found that it is possible to train com-
petitive MNIST and TIMIT networks
solely with this stochastic regularizer,
all without using any nonlinearity.
We often want a deterministic decision
from a neural network, and this gives
rise to our new nonlinearity. The non-
linearity is the expected transformation
of the stochastic regularizer on an input x, which is Φ(x)×Ix + (1− Φ(x))× 0x = xΦ(x).
Loosely, this expression states that we scalex by how much greater it is than other inputs. Since the
cumulative distribution function of a Gaussian is often computed with the error function, we define
the Gaussian Error Linear Unit (GELU) as
GELU(x) =xP (X≤x) =xΦ(x) =x· 1
2
h
1 + erf(x/
√
2)
i
.
We can approximate the GELU with
0.5x(1 + tanh[
p
2/π(x + 0.044715x3)])
or
xσ(1.702x),
if greater feedforward speed is worth the cost of exactness.
We could use different CDFs. For example we could use Logistic Distribution CDF σ(x) to get
what we call the Sigmoid Linear Unit (SiLU) xσ(x). We could use the CDF ofN (µ,σ 2) and have
µ andσ be learnable hyperparameters, but throughout this work we simply let µ = 0 andσ = 1.
Consequently, we do not introduce any new hyperparameters in the following experiments. In the
next section, we show that the GELU exceeds ReLUs and ELUs across numerous tasks.
3 GELU E XPERIMENTS
We evaluate the GELU, ELU, and ReLU on MNIST classification (grayscale images with 10 classes,
60k training examples and 10k test examples), MNIST autoencoding, Tweet part-of-speech tagging
(1000 training, 327 validation, and 500 testing tweets), TIMIT frame recognition (3696 training,
1152 validation, and 192 test audio sentences), and CIFAR-10/100 classification (color images with
10/100 classes, 50k training and 10k test examples). We do not evaluate nonlinearities like the
LReLU because of its similarity to ReLUs (see Maas et al. (2013) for a description of LReLUs).
3.1 MNIST C LASSIFICATION
Let us verify that this nonlinearity competes with previous activation functions by replicating an
experiment from Clevert et al. (2016). To this end, we train a fully connected neural network with
GELUs (µ = 0,σ = 1 ), ReLUs, and ELUs ( α = 1 ). Each 8-layer, 128 neuron wide neural
network is trained for 50 epochs with a batch size of 128. This experiment differs from those of
2