Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
THE CURIOUS CASE OF
NEURAL TEXT DeGENERATION
Ari Holtzman†‡ Jan Buys§† Li Du† Maxwell Forbes†‡ Yejin Choi†‡
†Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering, University of Washington
‡Allen Institute for Artiﬁcial Intelligence
§Department of Computer Science, University of Cape Town
{ahai,dul2,mbforbes,yejin}@cs.washington.edu, jbuys@cs.uct.ac.za
ABSTRACT
Despite considerable advances in neural language modeling, it remains an open
question what the best decoding strategy is for text generation from a language
model (e.g. to generate a story). The counter-intuitive empirical observation is
that even though the use of likelihood as training objective leads to high quality
models for a broad range of language understanding tasks, maximization-based
decoding methods such as beam search lead to degeneration — output text that is
bland, incoherent, or gets stuck in repetitive loops.
To address this we propose Nucleus Sampling, a simple but effective method to
draw considerably higher quality text out of neural language models than previ-
ous decoding strategies. Our approach avoids text degeneration by truncating the
unreliable tail of the probability distribution, sampling from the dynamic nucleus
of tokens containing the vast majority of the probability mass.
To properly examine current maximization-based and stochastic decoding meth-
ods, we compare generations from each of these methods to the distribution of
human text along several axes such as likelihood, diversity, and repetition. Our re-
sults show that (1) maximization is an inappropriate decoding objective for open-
ended text generation, (2) the probability distributions of the best current language
models have an unreliable tail which needs to be truncated during generation and
(3) Nucleus Sampling is currently the best available decoding strategy for gener-
ating long-form text that is both high-quality — as measured by human evaluation
— and as diverse as human-written text.
Context: In a shocking finding, scientist discovered a herd of unicorns living in a remote, previously unexplored valley, 
in the Andes Mountains. Even more surprising to the researchers was the fact that the unicorns spoke perfect English.
Beam Search, b=32:
"The study, published in the Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America (PNAS), was conducted by researchers from the 
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México (UNAM) and 
the Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México 
(UNAM/Universidad Nacional Autónoma de 
México/Universidad Nacional Autónoma de 
México/Universidad Nacional Autónoma de 
México/Universidad Nacional Autónoma de ...”
Pure Sampling:
They were cattle called Bolivian Cavalleros; they live in a 
remote desert uninterrupted by town, and they speak huge, 
beautiful, paradisiacal Bolivian linguistic thing. They say, 
'Lunch, marge.'They don't tell what the lunch is," director 
Professor Chuperas Omwell told Sky News. "They've only 
been talking to scientists,like we're being interviewed by TV 
reporters. We don't even stick around to be interviewed by 
TV reporters.Maybe that's how they figured out that they're 
cosplaying as the Bolivian Cavalleros."
Figure 1: Even with substantial human context and the powerful GPT-2 Large language model,
Beam Search (size 32) leads to degenerate repetition (highlighted in blue) while pure sampling
leads to incoherent gibberish (highlighted in red). When b≥ 64, both GPT-2 Large and XL (774M
and 1542M parameters, respectively) prefer to stop generating immediately after the given context.
1 I NTRODUCTION
On February 14th 2019, OpenAI surprised the scientiﬁc community with an impressively high-
quality article about Ovid’s Unicorn, written by GPT-2. 1 Notably, the top-quality generations ob-
1https://openai.com/blog/better-language-models/
1
arXiv:1904.09751v2  [cs.CL]  14 Feb 2020
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
tained from the model rely on randomness in the decoding method, in particular through top-k sam-
pling that samples the next word from the top k most probable choices (Fan et al., 2018; Holtzman
et al., 2018; Radford et al., 2019), instead of aiming to decode text that maximizes likelihood.
In fact, decoding strategies that optimize for output with high probability, such as beam search, lead
to text that is incredibly degenerate, even when using state-of-the-art models such as GPT-2 Large,
as shown in Figure 1. This may seem counter-intuitive, as one would expect that good models
would assign higher probability to more human-like, grammatical text. Indeed, language models
do generally assign high scores to well-formed text, yet the highest scores for longer texts are often
generic, repetitive, and awkward. Figure 2 exposes how different the distribution of probabilities
assigned to beam search decoded text and naturally occurring text really are.
Perhaps equally surprising is the right side of Figure 1, which shows that pure sampling — sampling
directly from the probabilities predicted by the model — results in text that is incoherent and almost
unrelated to the context. Why is text produced by pure sampling so degenerate? In this work we
show that the “unreliable tail” is to blame. This unreliable tail is composed of tens of thousands of
candidate tokens with relatively low probability that are over-represented in the aggregate.
To overcome these issues we introduce Nucleus Sampling (§3.1). The key intuition of Nucleus
Sampling is that the vast majority of probability mass at each time step is concentrated in thenucleus,
a small subset of the vocabulary that tends to range between one and a thousand candidates. Instead
of relying on a ﬁxed top-k, or using a temperature parameter to control the shape of the distribution
without sufﬁciently suppressing the unreliable tail, we propose sampling from the top- p portion of
the probability mass, expanding and contracting the candidate pool dynamically.
In order to compare current methods to Nucleus Sampling, we compare vari-
ous distributional properties of generated text to the reference distribution, such
as the likelihood of veering into repetition and the perplexity of generated text.
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0 20 40 60 80 100
Probability
Timestep
Beam Search Text is Less Surprising
Beam Search
Human
Beam Search
...to provide an overview of the 
current state-of-the-art in the field 
of computer vision and machine 
learning, and to provide an 
overview of the current
state-of-the-art in the field of
computer vision and machine 
learning, and to provide an
overview of the current 
state-of-the-art in the field of 
computer vision and machine
learning, and to provide an
overview of the current 
state-of-the-art in the field of 
computer vision and machine 
learning, and...
Human
...which grant increased life span
and three years warranty. The 
Antec HCG series consists of five 
models with capacities spanning 
from 400W to 900W. Here we 
should note that we have already 
tested the HCG-620 in a previous 
review and were quite satisfied 
With its performance. In today's 
review we will rigorously test the 
Antec HCG-520, which as its model
number implies, has 520W capacity 
and contrary to Antec's strong
beliefs in multi-rail PSUs is 
equipped...
Figure 2: The probability assigned to tokens gen-
erated by Beam Search and humans, given the
same context. Note the increased variance that
characterizes human text, in contrast with the end-
less repetition of text decoded by Beam Search.
The latter reveals that text generated by maxi-
mization or top-k sampling is too probable, in-
dicating a lack of diversity and divergence in
vocabulary usage from the human distribution.
On the other hand, pure sampling produces text
that is signiﬁcantly less likely than the gold,
corresponding to lower generation quality.
V ocabulary usage and Self-BLEU (Zhu et al.,
2018) statistics reveal that high values of k are
needed to make top- k sampling match human
statistics. Yet, generations based on high val-
ues of k often have high variance in likelihood,
hinting at qualitatively observable incoherency
issues. Nucleus Sampling can easily match ref-
erence perplexity through tuning the value of
p, avoiding the incoherence caused by setting k
high enough to match distributional statistics.
Finally, we perform Human Uniﬁed with Sta-
tistical Evaluation (HUSE; Hashimoto et al.,
2019) to jointly assess the overall quality and
diversity of the decoding strategies, which can-
not be captured using either human or auto-
matic evaluation alone. The HUSE evaluation
demonstrates that Nucleus Sampling is the best
overall decoding strategy. We include gener-
ated examples for qualitative analysis – see Fig-
ure 3 for a representative example, and further
examples in the appendix.2
2Code and all generations are available at https://github.com/ari-holtzman/degen
2