Scaling Laws for Neural Language Models
Jared Kaplan∗
Johns Hopkins University, OpenAI
jaredk@jhu.edu
Sam McCandlish∗
OpenAI
sam@openai.com
Tom Henighan
OpenAI
henighan@openai.com
Tom B. Brown
OpenAI
tom@openai.com
Benjamin Chess
OpenAI
bchess@openai.com
Rewon Child
OpenAI
rewon@openai.com
Scott Gray
OpenAI
scott@openai.com
Alec Radford
OpenAI
alec@openai.com
Jeffrey Wu
OpenAI
jeffwu@openai.com
Dario Amodei
OpenAI
damodei@openai.com
Abstract
We study empirical scaling laws for language model performance on the cross-entropy loss.
The loss scales as a power-law with model size, dataset size, and the amount of compute
used for training, with some trends spanning more than seven orders of magnitude. Other
architectural details such as network width or depth have minimal effects within a wide
range. Simple equations govern the dependence of overﬁtting on model/dataset size and the
dependence of training speed on model size. These relationships allow us to determine the
optimal allocation of a ﬁxed compute budget. Larger models are signiﬁcantly more sample-
efﬁcient, such that optimally compute-efﬁcient training involves training very large models
on a relatively modest amount of data and stopping signiﬁcantly before convergence.
∗Equal contribution.
Contributions: Jared Kaplan and Sam McCandlish led the research. Tom Henighan contributed the LSTM ex-
periments. Tom Brown, Rewon Child, and Scott Gray, and Alec Radford developed the optimized Transformer
implementation. Jeff Wu, Benjamin Chess, and Alec Radford developed the text datasets. Dario Amodei provided
guidance throughout the project.
arXiv:2001.08361v1  [cs.LG]  23 Jan 2020
Contents
1 Introduction 2
2 Background and Methods 6
3 Empirical Results and Basic Power Laws 7
4 Charting the Inﬁnite Data Limit and Overﬁtting 10
5 Scaling Laws with Model Size and Training Time 12
6 Optimal Allocation of the Compute Budget 14
7 Related Work 18
8 Discussion 18
Appendices 20
A Summary of Power Laws 20
B Empirical Model of Compute-Efﬁcient Frontier 20
C Caveats 22
D Supplemental Figures 23
1 Introduction
Language provides a natural domain for the study of artiﬁcial intelligence, as the vast majority of reason-
ing tasks can be efﬁciently expressed and evaluated in language, and the world’s text provides a wealth of
data for unsupervised learning via generative modeling. Deep learning has recently seen rapid progress in lan-
guage modeling, with state of the art models [RNSS18, DCLT18, YDY+19, LOG+19, RSR+19] approaching
human-level performance on many speciﬁc tasks [WPN +19], including the composition of coherent multi-
paragraph prompted text samples [RWC+19].
One might expect language modeling performance to depend on model architecture, the size of neural models,
the computing power used to train them, and the data available for this training process. In this work we will
empirically investigate the dependence of language modeling loss on all of these factors, focusing on the
Transformer architecture [VSP+17, LSP+18]. The high ceiling and low ﬂoor for performance on language
tasks allows us to study trends over more than seven orders of magnitude in scale.
Throughout we will observe precise power-law scalings for performance as a function of training time, con-
text length, dataset size, model size, and compute budget.
1.1 Summary
Our key ﬁndings for Transformer language models are are as follows:
2Here we display predicted compute when using a sufﬁciently small batch size. See Figure 13 for comparison to the
purely empirical data.
2