Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2015
ADAM: A M ETHOD FOR STOCHASTIC OPTIMIZATION
Diederik P. Kingma*
University of Amsterdam, OpenAI
dpkingma@openai.com
Jimmy Lei Ba∗
University of Toronto
jimmy@psi.utoronto.ca
ABSTRACT
We introduce Adam, an algorithm for ﬁrst-order gradient-based optimization of
stochastic objective functions, based on adaptive estimates of lower-order mo-
ments. The method is straightforward to implement, is computationally efﬁcient,
has little memory requirements, is invariant to diagonal rescaling of the gradients,
and is well suited for problems that are large in terms of data and/or parameters.
The method is also appropriate for non-stationary objectives and problems with
very noisy and/or sparse gradients. The hyper-parameters have intuitive interpre-
tations and typically require little tuning. Some connections to related algorithms,
on which Adam was inspired, are discussed. We also analyze the theoretical con-
vergence properties of the algorithm and provide a regret bound on the conver-
gence rate that is comparable to the best known results under the online convex
optimization framework. Empirical results demonstrate that Adam works well in
practice and compares favorably to other stochastic optimization methods. Finally,
we discuss AdaMax, a variant of Adam based on the inﬁnity norm.
1 I NTRODUCTION
Stochastic gradient-based optimization is of core practical importance in many ﬁelds of science and
engineering. Many problems in these ﬁelds can be cast as the optimization of some scalar parameter-
ized objective function requiring maximization or minimization with respect to its parameters. If the
function is differentiable w.r.t. its parameters, gradient descent is a relatively efﬁcient optimization
method, since the computation of ﬁrst-order partial derivatives w.r.t. all the parameters is of the same
computational complexity as just evaluating the function. Often, objective functions are stochastic.
For example, many objective functions are composed of a sum of subfunctions evaluated at different
subsamples of data; in this case optimization can be made more efﬁcient by taking gradient steps
w.r.t. individual subfunctions, i.e. stochastic gradient descent (SGD) or ascent. SGD proved itself
as an efﬁcient and effective optimization method that was central in many machine learning success
stories, such as recent advances in deep learning (Deng et al., 2013; Krizhevsky et al., 2012; Hinton
& Salakhutdinov, 2006; Hinton et al., 2012a; Graves et al., 2013). Objectives may also have other
sources of noise than data subsampling, such as dropout (Hinton et al., 2012b) regularization. For
all such noisy objectives, efﬁcient stochastic optimization techniques are required. The focus of this
paper is on the optimization of stochastic objectives with high-dimensional parameters spaces. In
these cases, higher-order optimization methods are ill-suited, and discussion in this paper will be
restricted to ﬁrst-order methods.
We propose Adam, a method for efﬁcient stochastic optimization that only requires ﬁrst-order gra-
dients with little memory requirement. The method computes individual adaptive learning rates for
different parameters from estimates of ﬁrst and second moments of the gradients; the name Adam
is derived from adaptive moment estimation. Our method is designed to combine the advantages
of two recently popular methods: AdaGrad (Duchi et al., 2011), which works well with sparse gra-
dients, and RMSProp (Tieleman & Hinton, 2012), which works well in on-line and non-stationary
settings; important connections to these and other stochastic optimization methods are clariﬁed in
section 5. Some of Adam’s advantages are that the magnitudes of parameter updates are invariant to
rescaling of the gradient, its stepsizes are approximately bounded by the stepsize hyperparameter,
it does not require a stationary objective, it works with sparse gradients, and it naturally performs a
form of step size annealing.
∗Equal contribution. Author ordering determined by coin ﬂip over a Google Hangout.
1
arXiv:1412.6980v9  [cs.LG]  30 Jan 2017
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2015
Algorithm 1: Adam, our proposed algorithm for stochastic optimization. See section 2 for details,
and for a slightly more efﬁcient (but less clear) order of computation. g2
t indicates the elementwise
square gt⊙gt. Good default settings for the tested machine learning problems are α = 0.001,
β1 = 0.9,β2 = 0.999 andϵ = 10−8. All operations on vectors are element-wise. With βt
1 andβt
2
we denoteβ1 andβ2 to the powert.
Require: α: Stepsize
Require: β1,β 2∈ [0, 1): Exponential decay rates for the moment estimates
Require: f(θ): Stochastic objective function with parametersθ
Require: θ0: Initial parameter vector
m0← 0 (Initialize 1st moment vector)
v0← 0 (Initialize 2nd moment vector)
t← 0 (Initialize timestep)
whileθt not converged do
t←t + 1
gt←∇ θft(θt−1) (Get gradients w.r.t. stochastic objective at timestept)
mt←β1·mt−1 + (1−β1)·gt (Update biased ﬁrst moment estimate)
vt←β2·vt−1 + (1−β2)·g2
t (Update biased second raw moment estimate)
ˆmt←mt/(1−βt
1) (Compute bias-corrected ﬁrst moment estimate)
ˆvt←vt/(1−βt
2) (Compute bias-corrected second raw moment estimate)
θt←θt−1−α·ˆmt/(√ˆvt +ϵ) (Update parameters)
end while
return θt (Resulting parameters)
In section 2 we describe the algorithm and the properties of its update rule. Section 3 explains
our initialization bias correction technique, and section 4 provides a theoretical analysis of Adam’s
convergence in online convex programming. Empirically, our method consistently outperforms other
methods for a variety of models and datasets, as shown in section 6. Overall, we show that Adam is
a versatile algorithm that scales to large-scale high-dimensional machine learning problems.
2 A LGORITHM
See algorithm 1 for pseudo-code of our proposed algorithm Adam. Let f(θ) be a noisy objec-
tive function: a stochastic scalar function that is differentiable w.r.t. parameters θ. We are in-
terested in minimizing the expected value of this function, E[f(θ)] w.r.t. its parameters θ. With
f1(θ),...,,f T (θ) we denote the realisations of the stochastic function at subsequent timesteps
1,...,T . The stochasticity might come from the evaluation at random subsamples (minibatches)
of datapoints, or arise from inherent function noise. Withgt =∇θft(θ) we denote the gradient, i.e.
the vector of partial derivatives offt, w.r.tθ evaluated at timestept.
The algorithm updates exponential moving averages of the gradient (mt) and the squared gradient
(vt) where the hyper-parametersβ1,β 2∈ [0, 1) control the exponential decay rates of these moving
averages. The moving averages themselves are estimates of the 1 st moment (the mean) and the
2nd raw moment (the uncentered variance) of the gradient. However, these moving averages are
initialized as (vectors of) 0’s, leading to moment estimates that are biased towards zero, especially
during the initial timesteps, and especially when the decay rates are small (i.e. theβs are close to 1).
The good news is that this initialization bias can be easily counteracted, resulting in bias-corrected
estimates ˆmt andˆvt. See section 3 for more details.
Note that the efﬁciency of algorithm 1 can, at the expense of clarity, be improved upon by changing
the order of computation, e.g. by replacing the last three lines in the loop with the following lines:
αt =α·
√
1−βt
2/(1−βt
1) andθt←θt−1−αt·mt/(√vt + ˆϵ).
2.1 A DAM’S UPDATE RULE
An important property of Adam’s update rule is its careful choice of stepsizes. Assumingϵ = 0, the
effective step taken in parameter space at timestept is ∆t =α·ˆmt/√ˆvt. The effective stepsize has
two upper bounds:|∆t|≤ α· (1−β1)/√1−β2 in the case (1−β1) >√1−β2, and|∆t|≤ α
2