Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics
V olume 1: Long Papers, pages 8424 - 8445
May 22-27, 2022 c©2022 Association for Computational Linguistics
Deduplicating Training Data Makes Language Models Better
Katherine Lee∗† Daphne Ippolito ∗†‡ Andrew Nystrom† Chiyuan Zhang†
Douglas Eck† Chris Callison-Burch‡ Nicholas Carlini†
Abstract
We ﬁnd that existing language modeling
datasets contain many near-duplicate exam-
ples and long repetitive substrings. As
a result, over 1% of the unprompted out-
put of language models trained on these
datasets is copied verbatim from the train-
ing data. We develop two tools that allow
us to deduplicate training datasets—for exam-
ple removing from C4 a single 61 word En-
glish sentence that is repeated over 60,000
times. Deduplication allows us to train mod-
els that emit memorized text ten times less
frequently and require fewer training steps
to achieve the same or better accuracy. We
can also reduce train-test overlap, which af-
fects over 4% of the validation set of stan-
dard datasets, thus allowing for more accurate
evaluation. Code for deduplication is released
at https://github.com/goog/l.Vare-research/
dedup/l.Varicate-text-datasets.
1 Introduction
A key factor behind the recent progress in natural
language processing is the development of large-
scale text corpora used to train increasingly large
language models. These datasets have grown from
single gigabytes to as much as a terabyte over the
past few years (Chelba et al., 2013; Xue et al., 2020;
Graff et al., 2003; Brown et al., 2020). Because
it is so expensive to perform manual review and
curation on massive datasets, they tend to suffer
in quality compared to their smaller predecessors.
This has implications far beyond metrics like per-
plexity and validation loss, as learned models re-
ﬂect the biases present in their training data (Ben-
der et al., 2021; Wallace et al., 2019; Sheng et al.,
2020). Quantitatively and qualitatively understand-
ing these datasets is therefore a research challenge
in its own right (Dodge et al., 2021a).
∗ Equal contribution. † Google Research, Brain Team.
‡ University of Pennsylvania. Correspond to kather-
inelee@google.com and daphnei@seas.upenn.edu.
We show that one particular source of bias, du-
plicated training examples, is pervasive: all four
common NLP datasets we studied contained dupli-
cates. Additionally, all four corresponding valida-
tion sets contained text duplicated in the training
set. While naive deduplication is straightforward
(and the datasets we consider already perform some
naive form of deduplication), performing thorough
deduplication at scale is both computationally chal-
lenging and requires sophisticated techniques.
We propose two scalable techniques to detect
and remove duplicated training data. Exact sub-
string matching identiﬁes verbatim strings that are
repeated. This allows us to identify cases where
only part of a training example is duplicated (§4.1).
Approximate full document matching uses hash-
based techniques (Broder, 1997) to identify pairs
of documents with highn-gram overlap (§4.2).
We identify four distinct advantages to training
on datasets that have been thoroughly deduplicated.
1. Over 1% of tokens emitted unprompted from
a model trained on standard datasets (e.g., C4)
are part of a memorized sequence (See §6.2)—
even though the 1.5 billion parameter model
is much smaller than the 350GB dataset it
was trained on. By deduplicating the training
dataset we reduce the rate of emitting memo-
rized training data by a factor of 10×.
2. Train-test overlap is common in non-
deduplicated datasets. For example, we ﬁnd a
61-word sequence1 in C4 (Raffel et al., 2020)
that is repeated 61,036 times verbatim in the
training dataset and 61 times in the validation
set ( 0.02% of the samples in each dataset).
1“by combining fantastic ideas, interesting arrangements,
and follow the current trends in the ﬁeld of that make you
more inspired and give artistic touches. We’d be honored if
you can apply some or all of these design in your wedding.
believe me, brilliant ideas would be perfect if it can be applied
in real and make the people around you amazed!”
1
8424
This train-test set overlap not only causes re-
searchers to over-estimate model accuracy, but
also biases model selection towards models
and hyperparameters that intentionally overﬁt
their training datasets.
3. Training models on deduplicated datasets is
more efﬁcient. Processing a dataset with our
framework requires a CPU-only linear-time
algorithm. And so because these datasets are
up to 19% smaller, even including the dedu-
plication runtime itself, training on dedupli-
cated datasets directly reduces the training
cost in terms of time, dollar, and the environ-
ment (Bender et al., 2021; Strubell et al., 2019;
Patterson et al., 2021).
4. Deduplicating training data does not hurt
perplexity: models trained on deduplicated
datasets have no worse perplexity compared
to baseline models trained on the original
datasets. In some cases deduplication reduces
perplexity by up to 10%. Further, because re-
cent LMs are typically limited to training for
just a few epochs (Radford et al., 2019; Raffel
et al., 2020), by training on higher quality data
the models can reach higher accuracy faster.
To summarize, data duplication offers signiﬁcant
advantages and no observed disadvantages. In the
remainder of this paper we present our text dedu-
plication framework in §4, and study the extent of
duplicate content in common NLP datasets (e.g.,
C4, Wiki-40B, and LM1B) in §5. We then exam-
ine the impact of deduplication on test perplexity
(§6.1) and on the frequency of emitting memorized
content (§6.2). Finally, we analyze to what ex-
tent perplexity on existing, released models are
skewed as a result of overlap between the train and
test/validation splits (§6.3).
2 Related Work
Large language model datasets. While we be-
lieve our results are independent of model archi-
tecture, we perform our analysis on Transformer-
based decoder-only language models (Vaswani
et al., 2017) trained for open-ended text generation.
These current state-of-the-art models are trained
on internet text. For example, the GPT-2 family
of models Radford et al. (2019) is trained on Web-
Text, a dataset of web documents highly ranked on
Reddit—however this dataset was not made avail-
able publicly. A common dataset starting point
is CommonCrawl, an index of public webpages.
Among the models trained on CommonCrawl in-
clude GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020) with the addition
of book datasets, GROVER (Zellers et al., 2019) on
a restricted subset ﬁltered to news domains called
RealNews, and T5 (Raffel et al., 2020) on a cleaned
version of common crawl called C4. Other models
are trained on more curated Internet sources—for
example Guo et al. (2020) used high quality pro-
cessed Wikipedia text from 40 different languages
to train monolingual 141.4M parameter language
models. Non-English models necessarily use dif-
ferent datasets; Zeng et al. (2021) for instance in-
troduced PANGU-α, a family of models with up to
200B parameters that were trained on a non-public
corpus of cleaned and ﬁltered Chinese-language
documents from CommonCrawl and other sources.
Since many of these datasets are not public, we
deduplicate three that are: Wiki-40B, C4, and
RealNews–as well as the One Billion Word Lan-
guage Model Benchmark (Chelba et al., 2013), a
smaller dataset commonly used for evaluation.
Contamination of downstream tasks. When
models are trained on datasets constructed by crawl-
ing the Internet, it is possible the model will train
on the test set of downstream target tasks. For ex-
ample, Radford et al. (2019, §4) performed a post-
hoc analysis to identify 8-gram overlaps between
GPT-2’s training set and datasets used for evalu-
ation, and Dodge et al. (2021b) analyzed C4 and
found that up to 14.4% of test examples for various
standard tasks were found verbatim (normalizing
for capitalization and punctuation) in the dataset.
A more proactive approach removes contaminated
data. Trinh and Le (2018, Appendix B) removed
documents from their CommonCrawl-based train
set that overlapped substantially with the common-
sense reasoning used for evaluation. And GPT-3
(Brown et al., 2020, §5) did the reverse and re-
moved downstream evaluation examples from their
training data by conservatively ﬁltering out any
train set examples with a 13-gram overlap with
any evaluation example. Up to 90% of tasks were
ﬂagged as potentially contaminated.
In our research, we do not focus on the impact of
duplicate text in pretrained models on downstream
benchmark tasks; instead we address how duplicate
text in the LM training and validation sets impacts
model perplexity and the extent to which generated
text included memorized content.
2
8425