Retrieval-Augmented Generation for
Knowledge-Intensive NLP Tasks
Patrick Lewis†‡, Ethan Perez⋆,
Aleksandra Piktus†, Fabio Petroni†, Vladimir Karpukhin†, Naman Goyal†, Heinrich Küttler†,
Mike Lewis†, Wen-tau Yih†, Tim Rocktäschel†‡, Sebastian Riedel†‡, Douwe Kiela†
†Facebook AI Research;‡University College London;⋆New York University;
plewis@fb.com
Abstract
Large pre-trained language models have been shown to store factual knowledge
in their parameters, and achieve state-of-the-art results when ﬁne-tuned on down-
stream NLP tasks. However, their ability to access and precisely manipulate knowl-
edge is still limited, and hence on knowledge-intensive tasks, their performance
lags behind task-speciﬁc architectures. Additionally, providing provenance for their
decisions and updating their world knowledge remain open research problems. Pre-
trained models with a differentiable access mechanism to explicit non-parametric
memory have so far been only investigated for extractive downstream tasks. We
explore a general-purpose ﬁne-tuning recipe for retrieval-augmented generation
(RAG) — models which combine pre-trained parametric and non-parametric mem-
ory for language generation. We introduce RAG models where the parametric
memory is a pre-trained seq2seq model and the non-parametric memory is a dense
vector index of Wikipedia, accessed with a pre-trained neural retriever. We com-
pare two RAG formulations, one which conditions on the same retrieved passages
across the whole generated sequence, and another which can use different passages
per token. We ﬁne-tune and evaluate our models on a wide range of knowledge-
intensive NLP tasks and set the state of the art on three open domain QA tasks,
outperforming parametric seq2seq models and task-speciﬁc retrieve-and-extract
architectures. For language generation tasks, we ﬁnd that RAG models generate
more speciﬁc, diverse and factual language than a state-of-the-art parametric-only
seq2seq baseline.
1 Introduction
Pre-trained neural language models have been shown to learn a substantial amount of in-depth knowl-
edge from data [47]. They can do so without any access to an external memory, as a parameterized
implicit knowledge base [51, 52]. While this development is exciting, such models do have down-
sides: They cannot easily expand or revise their memory, can’t straightforwardly provide insight into
their predictions, and may produce “hallucinations” [38]. Hybrid models that combine parametric
memory with non-parametric (i.e., retrieval-based) memories [20, 26, 48] can address some of these
issues because knowledge can be directly revised and expanded, and accessed knowledge can be
inspected and interpreted. REALM [ 20] and ORQA [ 31], two recently introduced models that
combine masked language models [8] with a differentiable retriever, have shown promising results,
arXiv:2005.11401v4  [cs.CL]  12 Apr 2021
The	Divine
Comedy	(x) q
Query
Encoder
q(x)
MIPS pθ
Generator pθ
(Parametric)
Margin-
alize
This	14th	century	work
is	divided	into	3
sections:	"Inferno",
"Purgatorio"	&
"Paradiso"									(y)
End-to-End Backprop through q and pθ
Barack	Obama	was
born	in	Hawaii.(x)
Fact Veriﬁcation: Fact Query
supports	(y)
Question Generation
Fact Veriﬁcation:
Label Generation
Document
Index
Define	"middle	ear"(x)
Question Answering:
Question Query
The	middle	ear	includes
the	tympanic	cavity	and
the	three	ossicles.		(y)
Question Answering:
Answer GenerationRetriever pη
(Non-Parametric)
z4
z3
z2
z1
d(z)
Jeopardy Question
Generation:
Answer Query
Figure 1: Overview of our approach. We combine a pre-trained retriever (Query Encoder + Document
Index) with a pre-trained seq2seq model (Generator) and ﬁne-tune end-to-end. For query x, we use
Maximum Inner Product Search (MIPS) to ﬁnd the top-K documentszi. For ﬁnal prediction y, we
treatz as a latent variable and marginalize over seq2seq predictions given different documents.
but have only explored open-domain extractive question answering. Here, we bring hybrid parametric
and non-parametric memory to the “workhorse of NLP,” i.e. sequence-to-sequence (seq2seq) models.
We endow pre-trained, parametric-memory generation models with a non-parametric memory through
a general-purpose ﬁne-tuning approach which we refer to as retrieval-augmented generation (RAG).
We build RAG models where the parametric memory is a pre-trained seq2seq transformer, and the
non-parametric memory is a dense vector index of Wikipedia, accessed with a pre-trained neural
retriever. We combine these components in a probabilistic model trained end-to-end (Fig. 1). The
retriever (Dense Passage Retriever [26], henceforth DPR) provides latent documents conditioned on
the input, and the seq2seq model (BART [32]) then conditions on these latent documents together with
the input to generate the output. We marginalize the latent documents with a top-K approximation,
either on a per-output basis (assuming the same document is responsible for all tokens) or a per-token
basis (where different documents are responsible for different tokens). Like T5 [51] or BART, RAG
can be ﬁne-tuned on any seq2seq task, whereby both the generator and retriever are jointly learned.
There has been extensive previous work proposing architectures to enrich systems with non-parametric
memory which are trained from scratch for speciﬁc tasks, e.g. memory networks [ 64, 55], stack-
augmented networks [25] and memory layers [ 30]. In contrast, we explore a setting where both
parametric and non-parametric memory components are pre-trained and pre-loaded with extensive
knowledge. Crucially, by using pre-trained access mechanisms, the ability to access knowledge is
present without additional training.
Our results highlight the beneﬁts of combining parametric and non-parametric memory with genera-
tion for knowledge-intensive tasks—tasks that humans could not reasonably be expected to perform
without access to an external knowledge source. Our RAG models achieve state-of-the-art results
on open Natural Questions [29], WebQuestions [3] and CuratedTrec [2] and strongly outperform
recent approaches that use specialised pre-training objectives on TriviaQA [24]. Despite these being
extractive tasks, we ﬁnd that unconstrained generation outperforms previous extractive approaches.
For knowledge-intensive generation, we experiment with MS-MARCO [1] and Jeopardy question
generation, and we ﬁnd that our models generate responses that are more factual, speciﬁc, and
diverse than a BART baseline. For FEVER [56] fact veriﬁcation, we achieve results within 4.3% of
state-of-the-art pipeline models which use strong retrieval supervision. Finally, we demonstrate that
the non-parametric memory can be replaced to update the models’ knowledge as the world changes.1
2 Methods
We explore RAG models, which use the input sequencex to retrieve text documentsz and use them
as additional context when generating the target sequence y. As shown in Figure 1, our models
leverage two components: (i) a retriever pη(z|x) with parametersη that returns (top-K truncated)
distributions over text passages given a queryx and (ii) a generatorpθ(yi|x,z,y 1:i−1) parametrized
1Code to run experiments with RAG has been open-sourced as part of the HuggingFace Transform-
ers Library [66] and can be found at https://github.com/huggingface/transformers/blob/master/
examples/rag/. An interactive demo of RAG models can be found at https://huggingface.co/rag/
2