Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
DECOUPLED WEIGHT DECAY REGULARIZATION
Ilya Loshchilov & Frank Hutter
University of Freiburg
Freiburg, Germany,
{ilya,fh}@cs.uni-freiburg.de
ABSTRACT
L2 regularization and weight decay regularization are equivalent for standard
stochastic gradient descent (when rescaled by the learning rate), but as we demon-
strate this is not the case for adaptive gradient algorithms, such as Adam. While
common implementations of these algorithms employ L 2 regularization (often
calling it “weight decay” in what may be misleading due to the inequivalence we
expose), we propose a simple modiﬁcation to recover the original formulation of
weight decay regularization bydecoupling the weight decay from the optimization
steps taken w.r.t. the loss function. We provide empirical evidence that our pro-
posed modiﬁcation (i) decouples the optimal choice of weight decay factor from
the setting of the learning rate for both standard SGD and Adam and (ii) substan-
tially improves Adam’s generalization performance, allowing it to compete with
SGD with momentum on image classiﬁcation datasets (on which it was previously
typically outperformed by the latter). Our proposed decoupled weight decay has
already been adopted by many researchers, and the community has implemented
it in TensorFlow and PyTorch; the complete source code for our experiments is
available at https://github.com/loshchil/AdamW-and-SGDW
1 I NTRODUCTION
Adaptive gradient methods, such as AdaGrad (Duchi et al., 2011), RMSProp (Tieleman & Hinton,
2012), Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2014) and most recently AMSGrad (Reddi et al., 2018) have become
a default method of choice for training feed-forward and recurrent neural networks (Xu et al., 2015;
Radford et al., 2015). Nevertheless, state-of-the-art results for popular image classiﬁcation datasets,
such as CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100 Krizhevsky (2009), are still obtained by applying SGD with
momentum (Gastaldi, 2017; Cubuk et al., 2018). Furthermore, Wilson et al. (2017) suggested that
adaptive gradient methods do not generalize as well as SGD with momentum when tested on a
diverse set of deep learning tasks, such as image classiﬁcation, character-level language modeling
and constituency parsing. Different hypotheses about the origins of this worse generalization have
been investigated, such as the presence of sharp local minima (Keskar et al., 2016; Dinh et al.,
2017) and inherent problems of adaptive gradient methods (Wilson et al., 2017). In this paper, we
investigate whether it is better to use L 2 regularization or weight decay regularization to train deep
neural networks with SGD and Adam. We show that a major factor of the poor generalization of the
most popular adaptive gradient method, Adam, is due to the fact that L2 regularization is not nearly
as effective for it as for SGD. Speciﬁcally, our analysis of Adam leads to the following observations:
L2 regularization and weight decay are not identical. The two techniques can be made equiv-
alent for SGD by a reparameterization of the weight decay factor based on the learning
rate; however, as is often overlooked, this is not the case for Adam. In particular, when
combined with adaptive gradients, L 2 regularization leads to weights with large historic
parameter and/or gradient amplitudes being regularized less than they would be when us-
ing weight decay.
L2 regularization is not effective in Adam. One possible explanation why Adam and other
adaptive gradient methods might be outperformed by SGD with momentum is that common
deep learning libraries only implement L 2 regularization, not the original weight decay.
Therefore, on tasks/datasets where the use of L2 regularization is beneﬁcial for SGD (e.g.,
1
arXiv:1711.05101v3  [cs.LG]  4 Jan 2019
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
on many popular image classiﬁcation datasets), Adam leads to worse results than SGD with
momentum (for which L2 regularization behaves as expected).
Weight decay is equally effective in both SGD and Adam. For SGD, it is equivalent to L 2
regularization, while for Adam it is not.
Optimal weight decay depends on the total number of batch passes/weight updates. Our
empirical analysis of SGD and Adam suggests that the larger the runtime/number of batch
passes to be performed, the smaller the optimal weight decay.
Adam can substantially beneﬁt from a scheduled learning rate multiplier. The fact that Adam
is an adaptive gradient algorithm and as such adapts the learning rate for each parameter
does not rule out the possibility to substantially improve its performance by using a global
learning rate multiplier, scheduled, e.g., by cosine annealing.
The main contribution of this paper is to improve regularization in Adam by decoupling the weight
decay from the gradient-based update. In a comprehensive analysis, we show that Adam generalizes
substantially better with decoupled weight decay than with L2 regularization, achieving 15% relative
improvement in test error (see Figures 2 and 3); this holds true for various image recognition datasets
(CIFAR-10 and ImageNet32x32), training budgets (ranging from 100 to 1800 epochs), and learning
rate schedules (ﬁxed, drop-step, and cosine annealing; see Figure 1). We also demonstrate that our
decoupled weight decay renders the optimal settings of the learning rate and the weight decay factor
much more independent, thereby easing hyperparameter optimization (see Figure 2).
The main motivation of this paper is to improve Adam to make it competitive w.r.t. SGD with
momentum even for those problems where it did not use to be competitive. We hope that as a result,
practitioners do not need to switch between Adam and SGD anymore, which in turn should reduce
the common issue of selecting dataset/task-speciﬁc training algorithms and their hyperparameters.
2 D ECOUPLING THE WEIGHT DECAY FROM THE GRADIENT -BASED UPDATE
In the weight decay described by Hanson & Pratt (1988), the weightsθ decay exponentially as
θt+1 = (1−λ)θt−α∇ft(θt), (1)
whereλ deﬁnes the rate of the weight decay per step and ∇ft(θt) is the t-th batch gradient to be
multiplied by a learning rateα. For standard SGD, it is equivalent to standard L2 regularization:
Proposition 1 (Weight decay = L2 reg for standard SGD). Standard SGD with base learning rateα
executes the same steps on batch loss functions ft(θ) with weight decay λ (deﬁned in Equation 1)
as it executes without weight decay onf reg
t (θ) = ft(θ) + λ′
2‖θ‖2
2, withλ′ = λ
α.
The proofs of this well-known fact, as well as our other propositions, are given in Appendix A.
Due to this equivalence, L 2 regularization is very frequently referred to as weight decay, including
in popular deep learning libraries. However, as we will demonstrate later in this section, this equiva-
lence does not hold for adaptive gradient methods. One fact that is often overlooked already for the
simple case of SGD is that in order for the equivalence to hold, the L2 regularizerλ′ has to be set to
λ
α, i.e., if there is an overall best weight decay value λ, the best value of λ′ is tightly coupled with
the learning rate α. In order to decouple the effects of these two hyperparameters, we advocate to
decouple the weight decay step as proposed by Hanson & Pratt (1988) (Equation 1).
Looking ﬁrst at the case of SGD, we propose to decay the weights simultaneously with the update
ofθt based on gradient information in Line 9 of Algorithm 1. This yields our proposed variant of
SGD with momentum using decoupled weight decay (SGDW). This simple modiﬁcation explicitly
decouplesλ andα (although some problem-dependent implicit coupling may of course remain as
for any two hyperparameters). In order to account for a possible scheduling of both α andλ, we
introduce a scaling factorηt delivered by a user-deﬁned procedureSetScheduleMultiplier (t).
Now, let’s turn to adaptive gradient algorithms like the popular optimizer Adam Kingma & Ba
(2014), which scale gradients by their historic magnitudes. Intuitively, when Adam is run on a loss
functionf plus L2 regularization, weights that tend to have large gradients inf do not get regularized
as much as they would with decoupled weight decay, since the gradient of the regularizer gets scaled
2