Training language models to follow instructions
with human feedback
Long Ouyang∗ Jeff Wu∗ Xu Jiang∗ Diogo Almeida∗ Carroll L. Wainwright∗
Pamela Mishkin∗ Chong Zhang Sandhini Agarwal Katarina Slama Alex Ray
John Schulman Jacob Hilton Fraser Kelton Luke Miller Maddie Simens
Amanda Askell† Peter Welinder Paul Christiano ∗†
Jan Leike∗ Ryan Lowe∗
OpenAI
Abstract
Making language models bigger does not inherently make them better at following
a user’s intent. For example, large language models can generate outputs that
are untruthful, toxic, or simply not helpful to the user. In other words, these
models are not aligned with their users. In this paper, we show an avenue for
aligning language models with user intent on a wide range of tasks by ﬁne-tuning
with human feedback. Starting with a set of labeler-written prompts and prompts
submitted through the OpenAI API, we collect a dataset of labeler demonstrations
of the desired model behavior, which we use to ﬁne-tune GPT-3 using supervised
learning. We then collect a dataset of rankings of model outputs, which we use to
further ﬁne-tune this supervised model using reinforcement learning from human
feedback. We call the resulting models InstructGPT. In human evaluations on
our prompt distribution, outputs from the 1.3B parameter InstructGPT model are
preferred to outputs from the 175B GPT-3, despite having 100x fewer parameters.
Moreover, InstructGPT models show improvements in truthfulness and reductions
in toxic output generation while having minimal performance regressions on public
NLP datasets. Even though InstructGPT still makes simple mistakes, our results
show that ﬁne-tuning with human feedback is a promising direction for aligning
language models with human intent.
1 Introduction
Large language models (LMs) can be “prompted” to perform a range of natural language process-
ing (NLP) tasks, given some examples of the task as input. However, these models often express
unintended behaviors such as making up facts, generating biased or toxic text, or simply not following
user instructions (Bender et al., 2021; Bommasani et al., 2021; Kenton et al., 2021; Weidinger et al.,
2021; Tamkin et al., 2021; Gehman et al., 2020). This is because the language modeling objective
∗Primary authors. This was a joint project of the OpenAI Alignment team. RL and JL are the team leads.
Corresponding author: lowe@openai.com.
†Work done while at OpenAI. Current afﬁliations: AA: Anthropic; PC: Alignment Research Center.
arXiv:2203.02155v1  [cs.CL]  4 Mar 2022
1.3B 6B 175B
Model size
0.2
0.4
0.6Win rate against SFT 175B
Model
PPO-ptx
PPO
SFT
GPT (prompted)
GPT
Figure 1: Human evaluations of various models on our API prompt distribution, evaluated by how
often outputs from each model were preferred to those from the 175B SFT model. Our InstructGPT
models (PPO-ptx) as well as its variant trained without pretraining mix (PPO) signiﬁcantly outperform
the GPT-3 baselines (GPT, GPT prompted); outputs from our 1.3B PPO-ptx model are preferred to
those from the 175B GPT-3. Error bars throughout the paper are 95% conﬁdence intervals.
used for many recent large LMs—predicting the next token on a webpage from the internet—is
different from the objective “follow the user’s instructions helpfully and safely” (Radford et al., 2019;
Brown et al., 2020; Fedus et al., 2021; Rae et al., 2021; Thoppilan et al., 2022). Thus, we say that
the language modeling objective is misaligned. Averting these unintended behaviors is especially
important for language models that are deployed and used in hundreds of applications.
We make progress on aligning language models by training them to act in accordance with the user’s
intention (Leike et al., 2018). This encompasses both explicit intentions such as following instructions
and implicit intentions such as staying truthful, and not being biased, toxic, or otherwise harmful.
Using the language of Askell et al. (2021), we want language models to be helpful (they should
help the user solve their task), honest (they shouldn’t fabricate information or mislead the user), and
harmless (they should not cause physical, psychological, or social harm to people or the environment).
We elaborate on the evaluation of these criteria in Section 3.6.
We focus on ﬁne-tuning approaches to aligning language models. Speciﬁcally, we use reinforcement
learning from human feedback (RLHF; Christiano et al., 2017; Stiennon et al., 2020) to ﬁne-tune
GPT-3 to follow a broad class of written instructions (see Figure 2). This technique uses human
preferences as a reward signal to ﬁne-tune our models. We ﬁrst hire a team of 40 contractors to label
our data, based on their performance on a screening test (see Section 3.4 and Appendix B.1 for more
details). We then collect a dataset of human-written demonstrations of the desired output behavior
on (mostly English) prompts submitted to the OpenAI API3 and some labeler-written prompts, and
use this to train our supervised learning baselines. Next, we collect a dataset of human-labeled
comparisons between outputs from our models on a larger set of API prompts. We then train a reward
model (RM) on this dataset to predict which model output our labelers would prefer. Finally, we
use this RM as a reward function and ﬁne-tune our supervised learning baseline to maximize this
reward using the PPO algorithm (Schulman et al., 2017). We illustrate this process in Figure 2. This
procedure aligns the behavior of GPT-3 to the stated preferences of a speciﬁc group of people (mostly
our labelers and researchers), rather than any broader notion of “human values”; we discuss this
further in Section 5.2. We call the resulting models InstructGPT.
We mainly evaluate our models by having our labelers rate the quality of model outputs on our test
set, consisting of prompts from held-out customers (who are not represented in the training data).
We also conduct automatic evaluations on a range of public NLP datasets. We train three model
3Speciﬁcally, we train on prompts submitted to earlier versions of the InstructGPT models on the OpenAI
API Playground, which were trained only using demonstration data. We ﬁlter out prompts containing PII.
2