Language Models are Unsupervised Multitask Learners
Alec Radford * 1 Jeffrey Wu * 1 Rewon Child 1 David Luan 1 Dario Amodei ** 1 Ilya Sutskever ** 1
Abstract
Natural language processing tasks, such as ques-
tion answering, machine translation, reading com-
prehension, and summarization, are typically
approached with supervised learning on task-
speciﬁc datasets. We demonstrate that language
models begin to learn these tasks without any ex-
plicit supervision when trained on a new dataset
of millions of webpages called WebText. When
conditioned on a document plus questions, the an-
swers generated by the language model reach 55
F1 on the CoQA dataset - matching or exceeding
the performance of 3 out of 4 baseline systems
without using the 127,000+ training examples.
The capacity of the language model is essential
to the success of zero-shot task transfer and in-
creasing it improves performance in a log-linear
fashion across tasks. Our largest model, GPT-2,
is a 1.5B parameter Transformer that achieves
state of the art results on 7 out of 8 tested lan-
guage modeling datasets in a zero-shot setting
but still underﬁts WebText. Samples from the
model reﬂect these improvements and contain co-
herent paragraphs of text. These ﬁndings suggest
a promising path towards building language pro-
cessing systems which learn to perform tasks from
their naturally occurring demonstrations.
1. Introduction
Machine learning systems now excel (in expectation) at
tasks they are trained for by using a combination of large
datasets, high-capacity models, and supervised learning
(Krizhevsky et al., 2012) (Sutskever et al., 2014) (Amodei
et al., 2016). Yet these systems are brittle and sensitive to
slight changes in the data distribution (Recht et al., 2018)
and task speciﬁcation (Kirkpatrick et al., 2017). Current sys-
tems are better characterized as narrow experts rather than
*, **Equal contribution 1OpenAI, San Francisco, Califor-
nia, United States. Correspondence to: Alec Radford
<alec@openai.com>.
competent generalists. We would like to move towards more
general systems which can perform many tasks – eventually
without the need to manually create and label a training
dataset for each one.
The dominant approach to creating ML systems is to col-
lect a dataset of training examples demonstrating correct
behavior for a desired task, train a system to imitate these
behaviors, and then test its performance on independent
and identically distributed (IID) held-out examples. This
has served well to make progress on narrow experts. But
the often erratic behavior of captioning models (Lake et al.,
2017), reading comprehension systems (Jia & Liang, 2017),
and image classiﬁers (Alcorn et al., 2018) on the diversity
and variety of possible inputs highlights some of the short-
comings of this approach.
Our suspicion is that the prevalence of single task training
on single domain datasets is a major contributor to the lack
of generalization observed in current systems. Progress
towards robust systems with current architectures is likely
to require training and measuring performance on a wide
range of domains and tasks. Recently, several benchmarks
have been proposed such as GLUE (Wang et al., 2018) and
decaNLP (McCann et al., 2018) to begin studying this.
Multitask learning (Caruana, 1997) is a promising frame-
work for improving general performance. However, mul-
titask training in NLP is still nascent. Recent work re-
ports modest performance improvements (Yogatama et al.,
2019) and the two most ambitious efforts to date have
trained on a total of 10 and 17(dataset, objective)
pairs respectively (McCann et al., 2018) (Bowman et al.,
2018). From a meta-learning perspective, each (dataset,
objective) pair is a single training example sampled
from the distribution of datasets and objectives. Current
ML systems need hundreds to thousands of examples to
induce functions which generalize well. This suggests that
multitask training many need just as many effective training
pairs to realize its promise with current approaches. It will
be very difﬁcult to continue to scale the creation of datasets
and the design of objectives to the degree that may be re-
quired to brute force our way there with current techniques.
This motivates exploring additional setups for performing
multitask learning.
The current best performing systems on language tasks
Language Models are Unsupervised Multitask Learners
Figure 1. Zero-shot task performance of WebText LMs as a function of model size on many NLP tasks. Reading Comprehension results
are on CoQA (Reddy et al., 2018), translation on WMT-14 Fr-En (Artetxe et al., 2017), summarization on CNN and Daily Mail (See et al.,
2017), and Question Answering on Natural Questions (Kwiatkowski et al., 2019). Section 3 contains detailed descriptions of each result.
utilize a combination of pre-training and supervised ﬁne-
tuning. This approach has a long history with a trend to-
wards more ﬂexible forms of transfer. First, word vectors
were learned and used as inputs to task-speciﬁc architec-
tures (Mikolov et al., 2013) (Collobert et al., 2011), then
the contextual representations of recurrent networks were
transferred (Dai & Le, 2015) (Peters et al., 2018), and re-
cent work suggests that task-speciﬁc architectures are no
longer necessary and transferring many self-attention blocks
is sufﬁcient (Radford et al., 2018) (Devlin et al., 2018).
These methods still require supervised training in order
to perform a task. When only minimal or no supervised
data is available, another line of work has demonstrated
the promise of language models to perform speciﬁc tasks,
such as commonsense reasoning (Schwartz et al., 2017) and
sentiment analysis (Radford et al., 2017).
In this paper, we connect these two lines of work and con-
tinue the trend of more general methods of transfer. We
demonstrate language models can perform down-stream
tasks in a zero-shot setting – without any parameter or archi-
tecture modiﬁcation. We demonstrate this approach shows
potential by highlighting the ability of language models to
perform a wide range of tasks in a zero-shot setting. We
achieve promising, competitive, and state of the art results
depending on the task.
2. Approach
At the core of our approach is language modeling. Lan-
guage modeling is usually framed as unsupervised distri-
bution estimation from a set of examples (x1, x2, ..., xn)
each composed of variable length sequences of symbols
(s1, s2, ..., sn). Since language has a natural sequential or-
dering, it is common to factorize the joint probabilities over
symbols as the product of conditional probabilities (Jelinek
& Mercer, 1980) (Bengio et al., 2003):
p(x) =
n∏
i=1
p(sn|s1, ..., sn−1) (1)
This approach allows for tractable sampling from and es-
timation of p(x) as well as any conditionals of the form
p(sn−k, ..., sn|s1, ..., sn−k−1). In recent years, there have
been signiﬁcant improvements in the expressiveness of mod-
els that can compute these conditional probabilities, such as
self-attention architectures like the Transformer (Vaswani
et al., 2017).
Learning to perform a single task can be expressed in a
probabilistic framework as estimating a conditional distri-
bution p(output|input). Since a general system should be
able to perform many different tasks, even for the same
input, it should condition not only on the input but also
on the task to be performed. That is, it should model
p(output|input, task). This has been variously formalized
in multitask and meta-learning settings. Task conditioning
is often implemented at an architectural level, such as the
task speciﬁc encoders and decoders in (Kaiser et al., 2017)
or at an algorithmic level such as the inner and outer loop
optimization framework of MAML (Finn et al., 2017). But
as exempliﬁed in McCann et al. (2018), language provides
a ﬂexible way to specify tasks, inputs, and outputs all as a
sequence of symbols. For example, a translation training
example can be written as the sequence (translate to
french, english text, french text) . Like-
wise, a reading comprehension training example can
be written as (answer the question, document,
question, answer) . McCann et al. (2018) demon-
strated it was possible to train a single model, the MQAN,