Proceedings of the 54th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , pages 1715–1725,
Berlin, Germany, August 7-12, 2016. c©2016 Association for Computational Linguistics
Neural Machine Translation of Rare Words with Subword Units
Rico Sennrich and Barry Haddow and Alexandra Birch
School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh
{rico.sennrich,a.birch}@ed.ac.uk,bhaddow@inf.ed.ac.uk
Abstract
Neural machine translation (NMT) mod-
els typically operate with a ﬁxed vocabu-
lary, but translation is an open-vocabulary
problem. Previous work addresses the
translation of out-of-vocabulary words by
backing off to a dictionary. In this pa-
per, we introduce a simpler and more ef-
fective approach, making the NMT model
capable of open-vocabulary translation by
encoding rare and unknown words as se-
quences of subword units. This is based on
the intuition that various word classes are
translatable via smaller units than words,
for instance names (via character copying
or transliteration), compounds (via com-
positional translation), and cognates and
loanwords (via phonological and morpho-
logical transformations). We discuss the
suitability of different word segmentation
techniques, including simple character n-
gram models and a segmentation based on
the byte pair encoding compression algo-
rithm, and empirically show that subword
models improve over a back-off dictionary
baseline for the WMT 15 translation tasks
English→German and English→Russian
by up to 1.1 and 1.3 BLEU, respectively.
1 Introduction
Neural machine translation has recently shown
impressive results (Kalchbrenner and Blunsom,
2013; Sutskever et al., 2014; Bahdanau et al.,
2015). However, the translation of rare words
is an open problem. The vocabulary of neu-
ral models is typically limited to 30 000–50 000
words, but translation is an open-vocabulary prob-
The research presented in this publication was conducted
in cooperation with Samsung Electronics Polska sp. z o.o. -
Samsung R&D Institute Poland.
lem, and especially for languages with produc-
tive word formation processes such as aggluti-
nation and compounding, translation models re-
quire mechanisms that go below the word level.
As an example, consider compounds such as the
German Abwasser|behandlungs|anlange ‘sewage
water treatment plant’, for which a segmented,
variable-length representation is intuitively more
appealing than encoding the word as a ﬁxed-length
vector.
For word-level NMT models, the translation
of out-of-vocabulary words has been addressed
through a back-off to a dictionary look-up (Jean et
al., 2015; Luong et al., 2015b). We note that such
techniques make assumptions that often do not
hold true in practice. For instance, there is not al-
ways a 1-to-1 correspondence between source and
target words because of variance in the degree of
morphological synthesis between languages, like
in our introductory compounding example. Also,
word-level models are unable to translate or gen-
erate unseen words. Copying unknown words into
the target text, as done by (Jean et al., 2015; Luong
et al., 2015b), is a reasonable strategy for names,
but morphological changes and transliteration is
often required, especially if alphabets differ.
We investigate NMT models that operate on the
level of subword units. Our main goal is to model
open-vocabulary translation in the NMT network
itself, without requiring a back-off model for rare
words. In addition to making the translation pro-
cess simpler, we also ﬁnd that the subword models
achieve better accuracy for the translation of rare
words than large-vocabulary models and back-off
dictionaries, and are able to productively generate
new words that were not seen at training time. Our
analysis shows that the neural networks are able to
learn compounding and transliteration from sub-
word representations.
This paper has two main contributions:
• We show that open-vocabulary neural ma-
1715
chine translation is possible by encoding
(rare) words via subword units. We ﬁnd our
architecture simpler and more effective than
using large vocabularies and back-off dictio-
naries (Jean et al., 2015; Luong et al., 2015b).
• We adapt byte pair encoding (BPE) (Gage,
1994), a compression algorithm, to the task
of word segmentation. BPE allows for the
representation of an open vocabulary through
a ﬁxed-size vocabulary of variable-length
character sequences, making it a very suit-
able word segmentation strategy for neural
network models.
2 Neural Machine Translation
We follow the neural machine translation archi-
tecture by Bahdanau et al. (2015), which we will
brieﬂy summarize here. However, we note that our
approach is not speciﬁc to this architecture.
The neural machine translation system is imple-
mented as an encoder-decoder network with recur-
rent neural networks.
The encoder is a bidirectional neural network
with gated recurrent units (Cho et al., 2014)
that reads an input sequence x = ( x1,...,x m)
and calculates a forward sequence of hidden
states (− →h 1,...,− →h m), and a backward sequence
(← −h 1,...,← −h m). The hidden states − →h j and← −h j are
concatenated to obtain the annotation vectorhj.
The decoder is a recurrent neural network that
predicts a target sequence y = (y1,...,y n). Each
word yi is predicted based on a recurrent hidden
state si, the previously predicted word yi−1, and
a context vector ci. ci is computed as a weighted
sum of the annotations hj. The weight of each
annotation hj is computed through an alignment
modelαij, which models the probability thatyi is
aligned to xj. The alignment model is a single-
layer feedforward neural network that is learned
jointly with the rest of the network through back-
propagation.
A detailed description can be found in (Bah-
danau et al., 2015). Training is performed on a
parallel corpus with stochastic gradient descent.
For translation, a beam search with small beam
size is employed.
3 Subword Translation
The main motivation behind this paper is that
the translation of some words is transparent in
that they are translatable by a competent transla-
tor even if they are novel to him or her, based
on a translation of known subword units such as
morphemes or phonemes. Word categories whose
translation is potentially transparent include:
• named entities. Between languages that share
an alphabet, names can often be copied from
source to target text. Transcription or translit-
eration may be required, especially if the al-
phabets or syllabaries differ. Example:
Barack Obama (English; German)
Áàðàê Îáàìà (Russian)
バラク・オバマ (ba-ra-ku o-ba-ma) (Japanese)
• cognates and loanwords. Cognates and loan-
words with a common origin can differ in
regular ways between languages, so that
character-level translation rules are sufﬁcient
(Tiedemann, 2012). Example:
claustrophobia (English)
Klaustrophobie (German)
Êëàóñòðîôîáèÿ (Klaustrofobiâ) (Russian)
• morphologically complex words. Words con-
taining multiple morphemes, for instance
formed via compounding, afﬁxation, or in-
ﬂection, may be translatable by translating
the morphemes separately. Example:
solar system (English)
Sonnensystem (Sonne + System) (German)
Naprendszer (Nap + Rendszer) (Hungarian)
In an analysis of 100 rare tokens (not among
the 50 000 most frequent types) in our German
training data 1, the majority of tokens are poten-
tially translatable from English through smaller
units. We ﬁnd 56 compounds, 21 names,
6 loanwords with a common origin ( emanci-
pate→emanzipieren), 5 cases of transparent afﬁx-
ation (sweetish ‘sweet’ + ‘-ish’→ süßlich ‘süß’ +
‘-lich’), 1 number and 1 computer language iden-
tiﬁer.
Our hypothesis is that a segmentation of rare
words into appropriate subword units is sufﬁ-
cient to allow for the neural translation network
to learn transparent translations, and to general-
ize this knowledge to translate and produce unseen
words.2 We provide empirical support for this hy-
1Primarily parliamentary proceedings and web crawl data.
2Not every segmentation we produce is transparent.
While we expect no performance beneﬁt from opaque seg-
mentations, i.e. segmentations where the units cannot be
translated independently, our NMT models show robustness
towards oversplitting.
1716