Journal of Machine Learning Research 15 (2014) 1929-1958 Submitted 11/13; Published 6/14
Dropout: A Simple Way to Prevent Neural Networks from
Overﬁtting
Nitish Srivastava nitish@cs.toronto.edu
Geoﬀrey Hinton hinton@cs.toronto.edu
Alex Krizhevsky kriz@cs.toronto.edu
Ilya Sutskever ilya@cs.toronto.edu
Ruslan Salakhutdinov rsalakhu@cs.toronto.edu
Department of Computer Science
University of Toronto
10 Kings College Road, Rm 3302
Toronto, Ontario, M5S 3G4, Canada.
Editor: Yoshua Bengio
Abstract
Deep neural nets with a large number of parameters are very powerful machine learning
systems. However, overﬁtting is a serious problem in such networks. Large networks are also
slow to use, making it diﬃcult to deal with overﬁtting by combining the predictions of many
diﬀerent large neural nets at test time. Dropout is a technique for addressing this problem.
The key idea is to randomly drop units (along with their connections) from the neural
network during training. This prevents units from co-adapting too much. During training,
dropout samples from an exponential number of diﬀerent “thinned” networks. At test time,
it is easy to approximate the eﬀect of averaging the predictions of all these thinned networks
by simply using a single unthinned network that has smaller weights. This signiﬁcantly
reduces overﬁtting and gives major improvements over other regularization methods. We
show that dropout improves the performance of neural networks on supervised learning
tasks in vision, speech recognition, document classiﬁcation and computational biology,
obtaining state-of-the-art results on many benchmark data sets.
Keywords: neural networks, regularization, model combination, deep learning
1. Introduction
Deep neural networks contain multiple non-linear hidden layers and this makes them very
expressive models that can learn very complicated relationships between their inputs and
outputs. With limited training data, however, many of these complicated relationships
will be the result of sampling noise, so they will exist in the training set but not in real
test data even if it is drawn from the same distribution. This leads to overﬁtting and many
methods have been developed for reducing it. These include stopping the training as soon as
performance on a validation set starts to get worse, introducing weight penalties of various
kinds such as L1 and L2 regularization and soft weight sharing (Nowlan and Hinton, 1992).
With unlimited computation, the best way to “regularize” a ﬁxed-sized model is to
average the predictions of all possible settings of the parameters, weighting each setting by
c©2014 Nitish Srivastava, Geoﬀrey Hinton, Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever and Ruslan Salakhutdinov.
Srivastava, Hinton, Krizhevsky, Sutskever and Salakhutdinov
(a) Standard Neural Net
 (b) After applying dropout.
Figure 1: Dropout Neural Net Model. Left: A standard neural net with 2 hidden layers. Right:
An example of a thinned net produced by applying dropout to the network on the left.
Crossed units have been dropped.
its posterior probability given the training data. This can sometimes be approximated quite
well for simple or small models (Xiong et al., 2011; Salakhutdinov and Mnih, 2008), but we
would like to approach the performance of the Bayesian gold standard using considerably
less computation. We propose to do this by approximating an equally weighted geometric
mean of the predictions of an exponential number of learned models that share parameters.
Model combination nearly always improves the performance of machine learning meth-
ods. With large neural networks, however, the obvious idea of averaging the outputs of
many separately trained nets is prohibitively expensive. Combining several models is most
helpful when the individual models are diﬀerent from each other and in order to make
neural net models diﬀerent, they should either have diﬀerent architectures or be trained
on diﬀerent data. Training many diﬀerent architectures is hard because ﬁnding optimal
hyperparameters for each architecture is a daunting task and training each large network
requires a lot of computation. Moreover, large networks normally require large amounts of
training data and there may not be enough data available to train diﬀerent networks on
diﬀerent subsets of the data. Even if one was able to train many diﬀerent large networks,
using them all at test time is infeasible in applications where it is important to respond
quickly.
Dropout is a technique that addresses both these issues. It prevents overﬁtting and
provides a way of approximately combining exponentially many diﬀerent neural network
architectures eﬃciently. The term “dropout” refers to dropping out units (hidden and
visible) in a neural network. By dropping a unit out, we mean temporarily removing it from
the network, along with all its incoming and outgoing connections, as shown in Figure 1.
The choice of which units to drop is random. In the simplest case, each unit is retained with
a ﬁxed probability p independent of other units, where p can be chosen using a validation
set or can simply be set at 0 .5, which seems to be close to optimal for a wide range of
networks and tasks. For the input units, however, the optimal probability of retention is
usually closer to 1 than to 0 .5.
1930